(MENAFN- Qatar News Agency) Ha July 27 (QNA) - HE Foreign Minister of Qatar Dr. Khalid bin Mohammed Al Attiyah stressed Sunday that the demands of Palestinians for an end to Israeli aggression were just. HE the Minister Dr. Al Attiyah added that Qatar's position on a ceasefire is comprised of ending the attack on Gaza strip and lifting the siege. His Excellency said in an interview to Al-Jazeera channel that the goals of Paris Conference on Gaza is to brief representatives of the EU Italy France Germany and the United Kingdom on the outcome of negotiations and how could all parties involved reach a ceasefire. HE the Foreign Minister dismissed reports that the conference was to extend the humanitarian ceasefire stressing that the main goal was to lift the siege on Gaza. HE the Foreign Minister said that Gaza Strip is living in abysmal conditions since 1967 noting that Israel's withdrawal in 2005 was only aimed to isolate the strip demographically even further. On the kidnapping of three Israeli teens in the West Bank HE the Foreign Minister said that Palestinian factions had long been the first to claim responsibility for such events. However this was not the case with the June 12 incident His Excellency added. In response Israel waged a war with fighter Jets and tanks from June 12 to July 6. HE the Foreign Minister said that in addition to quick death by Israeli fire Gaza strip was facing a slow death through the siege which left them no option but to defend their selves for a better life. His Excellency highlighted Israel's continued disrespect for most of agreements signed between the two parties giving an example with the ceasefire agreement in 2012. The agreement was to establish a ceasefire in return for releasing prisoners in Israeli prison which did not happen. HE the Foreign Minister provided another example with 2011 agreement of Israeli officer Shalit. The agreement was to exchange Shalit with Palestinian prisoners however Israel incarcerated more Palestinians from the West Bank. HE the Minister said that the demands of the people in Gaza is to implement the 2012 and 2011 agreements in addition to establishing a commercial port that would help the people in Gaza earn a living. The demands also include establishing Gaza's sovereignty over its territorial water. On a rumored disagreement with Egypt's role and whether there was a Qatari-Turkish coalition against Egypt's role HE the Minister dismissed such rumors saying that Qatar Turkey and the Arab World valued Egypt's role describing it as the number one role in the current negotiations. His Excellency revealed that Qatar has been in contact with Egyptian authorities to offer their support and said that Egypt based on geography will be the country most concerned with developments in Gaza. On Israel's position refusing an extension to the ceasefire HE the Foreign Minister said that the Israeli government has been operating outside the scope of international law and all international conventions stressing however that no one will abandon Palestinians adding that the Palestinian cause is the cause of all Arab and Islamic countries. On Israel's allegations that Qatar finances terrorism HE the Foreign Minister said that Israeli Ministers of Finance and Foreign Affairs are exercising terrorism themselves and not just supporting it. As a result HE the Foreign Minister said they were the last to talk about supporting terrorism. HE the Minister Dr. Al Attiyah also denied that Qatar and Turkey were pressuring Hamas in any way saying that their role is only to convey the demands of Palestinians in a transparent and honest way. HE the Foreign Minister said that many members of the international community feel for the struggle of Hamas but due to many considerations could not make those feelings public. HE the Foreign Minister said that the Palestinian side worked productively with US Secretary of State John Kerry over the past few days however all the good work was undone by the Israeli cabinet's rejection HE the Foreign Minister added. HE the Foreign Minister wondered how after that can accusation be thrown Hamas' way. HE the Foreign Minister stressed that the Palestinian resistance was legitimate and will continue until they free their land. His Excellence added that those who want peace must commit to peace agreements. HE the Foreign Minister also warned that Israel can no longer enter the West Bank and Gaza and attack them as in the past adding that now Israel could pay for its action through the international community and the UN Security Council.