Doha, June 30 (QNA) - Advisor to the Prime Minister and Official Spokesperson for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Dr. Majed bin Mohammed Al Ansari has affirmed that the State of Qatar is deeply involved in efforts to reach an agreement on the Iranian nuclear issue, especially after the ceasefire between Israel and Iran and the end of the escalation witnessed in the region.
He said that there are currently no talks on a ceasefire in Gaza.
During the weekly media briefing organized by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Al Ansari said Qatari interest, as well as that of various countries around the world, is now directed towards reaching a broader, more comprehensive nuclear agreement between Iran and the United States of America, noting that Qatari contacts are ongoing daily between various parties in this regard.
He added there are no talks about a ceasefire in the Gaza Strip, but the State of Qatar, along with its mediation partners, the Arab Republic of Egypt and the United States, continue to communicate with various parties to reach a formula that will enable us to return to negotiations.
The Advisor to the Prime Minister and Spokesperson for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs condemned the humanitarian catastrophe in Gaza in light of the current Israeli escalation, saying, it has become very difficult for us, as an international community, to accept that this crisis continues for nearly two years, and that these human losses remain insignificant figures in the media.
He said that more than 500 martyrs have fallen so far as a result of standing in lines waiting for aid, noting that there are very disturbing reports published in the Israeli press, speaking of orders issued to Israeli soldiers to open fire against unarmed individuals who were standing regularly waiting to receive humanitarian aid.
He emphasized that this catastrophe has exceeded all possible limits from a humanitarian standpoint, emphasizing that it is unacceptable to continue linking the humanitarian aspect with the security aspect in this context.
He noted that the state is continuing its contacts with various parties with the aim of reaching a new mechanism, which is difficult to comment on at this time.
He stressed that this process is constructive and ongoing, and is subject to formulas that are being developed based on developments on the ground.
In a related context, Al Ansari explained that the State of Qatar sees positive American positions to push for a return to negotiations on Gaza, saying in this regard the US administration has brought us to the longest ceasefire during this war.
We also saw how the US administration led to a ceasefire between Iran and Israel and obligated both parties to abide by it.
Today, we see renewed, positive language coming from the United States to reach an agreement, and therefore we are very optimistic about this language.
We believe that there are very clear American intentions regarding a final resolution to this crisis.
However, there are complications on the ground that are evident to everyone, he added.
He emphasized that the State of Qatar will continue to pressure, through its partners and relations in the international community, to separate negotiations from the entry of humanitarian aid, saying there is nothing preventing the entry of aid into the Gaza Strip except Israeli intransigence, and therefore the Israeli position today cannot be accepted. 
Advisor to the Prime Minister and Official Spokesperson for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs Dr. Majed bin Mohammed Al Ansari pointed out that the entire world sends humanitarian aid, but it does not enter the Gaza Strip.
Qatar's humanitarian aid, like international aid, is only a few meters away from reaching those in need, as it is in the Egyptian city of El Arish.
He called on the international community to compel Israel to open all crossings and allow aid into the Strip without any restrictions or conditions.
Al Ansari said the system of international agencies and institutions is present on the borders of the Gaza Strip, and it was clearly functioning and did not lead to the humanitarian tragedy we see today in the delivery of aid.
This system can achieve its goals and is ready to be implemented immediately once the Israeli side allows it, he said.
He reiterated that there is no specific timeframe for announcing a ceasefire in the Gaza Strip, especially since the ongoing discussions have not yet got to the level they reached previously, and the accumulated language does not indicate the possibility of reaching an agreement now.
Al Ansari noted that the Iranian president offered an official apology to the State of Qatar, its leadership and people, during a phone call he held with HH the Amir Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, noting that the main guarantee against a return to such escalation lies in ensuring that there is no escalation in the region.
He further said that the State of Qatar is working directly towards finding a way to reach a ceasefire in the Gaza Strip and then reach a general agreement in the region that ensures the absence of any threat from any party there.
He said that the irresponsible Israeli position of continuing the escalation in this manner will result in unforeseen challenges, and the region today is not far from escalation, even if a ceasefire is the main theme at this time.
He called on all parties in the region to engage in positive action to ensure the continuation of the ceasefire and de-escalation.
The Advisor to the Prime Minister and Official Spokesperson for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs expressed the State of Qatar's appreciation for the 49th Extraordinary Meeting of the Ministerial Council of the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), held in Doha one day after the Iranian attack on Al-Udeid Air Base, which clearly affirmed the condemnation of this attack, GCC solidarity in this regard, and the GCC position in support of diplomatic efforts.
He noted that the statement issued at the meeting welcomed the ceasefire between Iran and Israel and the Qatari role in this regard, adding that there is a clear regional position on the need to de-escalate the situation in the region.
Al Ansari also addressed the calls received by HE Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs Sheikh Mohammed bin Abdulrahman bin Jassim Al-Thani from Their Excellencies the Prime Ministers and Foreign Ministers of several brotherly and friendly countries, during which they expressed their great solidarity with the State of Qatar and their condemnation of the Iranian attack on Al-Udeid Air Base.
He expressed Qatar's high appreciation for this great international solidarity with Qatar.
Dr. Majed bin Mohammed Al Ansari noted that HE the Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs will be in the Republic of Ireland tomorrow, Tuesday, to receive the Tipperary Peace Award, a prestigious global honor in this field.
The award is presented annually in recognition of humanitarian efforts and activities aimed at building peace globally.
He explained that this award, presented by the Tipperary Peace Convention, aims to honor individuals and organizations that have made outstanding contributions to the fields of peace, justice, and human rights around the world.
He highlighted that this recognition reflects the significant role played by HE the Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs in various mediations, and also underscores the important position enjoyed by the State of Qatar in global peacemaking.
Al Ansari noted that this award represents an opportunity to affirm Qatar's commitment to its role not only as a peacemaker, but also as an engineer of global peace, saying that this is what Qatar is currently doing, whether through contacts regarding the Iranian nuclear issue, the ceasefire in the Gaza Strip, or between the Congo and Rwanda, or various regional and international issues.
He pointed out that Qatar participated in the World Humanitarian Forum, held in London on June 26, where HE Minister of State for International Cooperation Maryam bint Ali bin Nasser Al Misnad represented Qatar at the meeting.
In her speech during the meeting, Her Excellency emphasized the importance of adhering to a principled and consistent approach to humanitarian work, especially in light of escalating global crises and challenges.
Her Excellency also stressed that adherence to international humanitarian law and relevant agreements is not an option, but rather a legal and moral obligation to ensure the protection of civilians and the preservation of human dignity. She affirmed that the State of Qatar is committed to making every effective effort to promote dialogue and strive to achieve stability.
Al Ansari noted that on the sidelines of the meeting, HE the Minister of State for International Cooperation met with a number of figures, including CEO of the World Humanitarian Forum, HE Lord of Wimbledon, former Minister of State for the Middle East, South Asia and United Nations at the UK Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office Lord Tariq Ahmad, and member of the Advisory Board of the World Humanitarian Forum Richard Hawkes.
He noted that the State of Qatar participated in the signing ceremony of the peace agreement between the Republic of Rwanda and the Democratic Republic of the Congo, which took place on June 27 and 28 in Washington, D.C., facilitated by the United States.
HE Minister of State at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Dr. Mohammed bin Abdulaziz bin Saleh Al Khulaifi represented the State of Qatar at the signing ceremony.
His Excellency expressed Qatar's welcome of the conclusion of this agreement and commended the sincere will and genuine commitment shown by both parties to peaceful and diplomatic solutions.
He added that His Excellency also expressed Qatar's pride in contributing positively to facilitating the achievement of this agreement through hosting several negotiation sessions between the two parties, as a result of Doha's hosting of the trilateral meeting between HH the Amir Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani; HE President of the Republic of Rwanda, Paul Kagame and HE President of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Felix Tshisekedi in March 2025, which constituted a significant milestone for direct dialogue and confidence-building between the two sides.
His Excellency also commended the constructive role played by the United States of America in completing these efforts and reaching the Agreement.
Al Ansari added that HE Minister of State at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs met in Washington, with HE Undersecretary of State for Political Affairs of the United States of America, Allison Hooker, and with HE Chairman of the US Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Senator Jim Risch, along with a number of Senators. 
