Doha Agreement on the outcome of the meeting of the Lebanese National Dialogue Conference Under the gracious auspices of His Highness Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar; Pursuant to the efforts of the Arab Ministerial Committee to resolve the Lebanese crisis, presided over by His Excellency Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabr Al-Thani, Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs of the State of Qatar and Mr. Amr Moussa, Secretary-General of the League of Arab States, and comprised of Their Excellencies the Ministers for Foreign Affairs of Algeria, Bahrain, Djibouti, Jordan, Morocco, Oman, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen; On the basis of the Arab Initiative to contain the Lebanese crisis; And in implementation of the agreement concluded by the Lebanese parties in Beirut on 15 May 2008 under the auspices of the Arab Ministerial Committee, which is an integral part of this declaration (annexed); The Lebanese National Dialogue Conference was convened in Doha from 16 to 21 May 2008, with the participation of the Lebanese political leaders who are members of that Conference and had affirmed their commitment to saving Lebanon and ending the current political crisis, which had serious implications for the coexistence formula and communal peace in the population of Lebanon, and their commitment to the principles enshrined in the Lebanese Constitution and the Taif Accords. As a result of meeting proceedings and of bilateral and group consultations conducted by the Chairman and members of the Arab Ministerial Committee with all parties taking part in the meeting, Agreement was reached on the following: 1. The parties agreed that the Speaker of Parliament will call on the Lebanese Parliament to convene in accordance with established rules within 24 hours in order to elect the consensus candidate General Michel Sleiman as President of the Republic, this being the best and most constitutional way of electing the President under these extraordinary circumstances. 2. A national unity Government will be formed, comprising 30 ministers to be allocated as follows: 16 to the majority, 11 to the opposition, and three to the President. All parties pledge by virtue of this Agreement not to resign or obstruct the work of the Government. 3. In accordance with the electoral law of 1960, the district (qada’) will be adopted as the electoral constituency in Lebanon, and the two districts of Marj `Uyun-Hasbayya will remain a single electoral constituency, as will Baalbek-Hirmil and Western Bekaa-Rashayya. Beirut will be divided as follows: First constituency: Ashrafiyya — Rumayl — Sayfi; Second constituency: Bashurah — Mudawwar — the Port; Third constituency: Mina’ al-Husn — `Ayn al-Muraysah — Mazra`ah — Musaytibah — Ra’s Beirut — Zuqaq al-Balat. S/2008/578 4 08-48885 It was agreed to refer to Parliament the reform clauses contained in the draft law prepared by the National Commission for the Electoral Law under the chairmanship of former minister Fuad Butros, for discussion and consideration in accordance with established procedures. 4. The above-mentioned Beirut agreement will be implemented, and in particular, paragraphs 4 and 5 thereof, which read as follows: “4. The parties shall undertake to refrain from using or returning to the use of weapons or violence in order to achieve political gains. 5. Dialogue should begin on strengthening the authority of the Lebanese State over all its territory and in its relations with the various organizations on the Lebanese scene, in order to ensure the security of the State and its citizens ...” Dialogue was therefore launched in Doha on strengthening the authority of the State in accordance with paragraph 5 of the Beirut agreement, and agreement was reached on the following: • Resort to the use of weapons or violence to resolve differences of any kind under any circumstances is prohibited, in order to ensure that there is no violation of the national partnership contract that is based on the determination of the Lebanese to coexist within a democratic system. Security and military authority over Lebanese nationals and residents shall be the sole province of the State, in order to ensure the continuation of the coexistence formula and communal peace for all Lebanese people. The parties are committed to the foregoing. • The law is to be applied and the sovereignty of the State honoured in all regions of Lebanon. There shall be no regions in which fugitives from justice may take refuge, out of respect for the rule of law, and anyone who commits crimes or violations shall be brought before the Lebanese judiciary. This dialogue shall be resumed, with the participation of the League of Arab States, under the aegis of the President of the Republic as soon as he has been elected and a national unity Government formed, with a view to strengthening the confidence of the Lebanese population. 5. The Lebanese political leaders reaffirm their commitment to refrain forthwith from using mutual recrimination or political and sectarian propaganda. The Arab Ministerial Committee undertakes to deposit this Agree