he Doha Accord between the Republics of Sudan and Chad was signed here tonight with a view to normalization of relations between the two countries and providing an atmosphere of confidence and adequate circumstances to convene a summit in Tripoli, Libya between the heads of state of the two countries.
The two parties confirmed their determination not to interfere in the internal affairs of the other party and to act for the full implementation of the agreements struck between the two parties , with each party pledging to refrain from the use of force or threating of it against the other party.
A press release was issued on the occasion stating that,''Within the framework of the good offices of His Highness Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar and his brother leader Muamer Al-Gadhafi, Leader of the Revolution in the Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Chairman of the African Union, concerning the normalization of relations between the Republic of Chad and Republic of Sudan, the consolidation of the relations between them; In pursuant to what has been agreed upon between the two countries in the previous agreements, concluded between them, And in order to create an atmosphere of confidence and appropriate conditions to the convening of the Tripoli Summit in Libya between the Presidents of the two countries,
With the participation of H.E. Sheikh Hamad bin Jassim bin Jabor Al-Thani, Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs of the State of Qatar, and in the presence of H.E. Mr. Mousa Mohamed Kousa, the Secretary General of the People's General Committee for Foreign Communication and International Cooperation in the Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya and H.E. Mr. Ahmed bin Abdulla Al-Mahmoud, Minister of State for Foreign Affairs and Member of the Cabinet of the State of Qatar, met in Doha, in the period 29 April - 3rd May 2009, a delegation from the Republic of Chad, led by H.E. Mr. Mousa Faki Mohamed, Minister of Foreign Relations with a delegation from the Republic of Sudan, led by H.E. Mr. Al-Jijani Saleh Fidail, Minister of International Cooperation.
During the meeting, a spirit of confidence and reconciliation prevailed. The two sides discussed the items on the Agenda in a constructive manner, which was conducive to reaching an agreement that is likely to place the relations between the two countries on its proper track.
The two parties pledged to expedite implementing them with a view to restoring the climate of confidence and good-neighborliness.



